Pip 36 (#205)
pactus-project/PIPs: PIPs/pip-36.md

---
pip: 36
title: ZeroMQ Notification Service
description: Real-time notification service for Pactus using ZeroMQ PUB/SUB
author: Pactus Development Team <info@pactus.org>
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core

> discussion-no:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
discussion-no: 206
```

1. **0x0001**: Block Info
2. **0x0002**: Transaction Info
3. **0x0003**: Raw Block
4. **0x0004**: Raw Transaction

### Topic Data

The topic data contains variable-length information specific to each topic, as outlined below:

#### Block Info

The Block Info topic data is structured as:

```text
<Proposer Address: 21 bytes> + <Block Time in Unix: 4 bytes> + <Block Number: 4 bytes>
```

#### Transaction Info

The Transaction Info topic data is structured as:

```text
<Transaction ID: 32 bytes> + <Block Number: 4 Bytes>
```

The block number indicates the block in which the transaction is confirmed.
If the block number is set to `0`, the transaction remains unconfirmed.
This allows the service to notify applications when transactions enter the transaction pool, with room for future expansion.

#### Raw Block Header

The Raw Block Header topic data is structured as:

```text
<Raw Block Header: Variable Length> + <Block Certificate: Variable Length>
```

#### Raw Transaction

The Raw Transaction topic data is structured as:

```text
<Raw Transaction: Variable Length>
```

### Configuration

In the configuration file, the following items should be added under the `[zeromq]` section:

> ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```toml
```

# `zeromq` contains configuration options for the ZeroMQ notification service.
[zeromq]

  # `zmqpubblockinfo` specifies the address for publishing block info notifications.
  # Example: "tcp://127.0.0.1:28332"
  # Default is "", meaning the topic is disabled

>   zmqpubblockinfo: ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  zmqpubblockinfo = ""
```

  # `zmqpubtxinfo` specifies the address for publishing transaction info notifications.
  # Example: "tcp://127.0.0.1:28332"
  # Default is "", meaning the topic is disabled

>   zmqpubtxinfo: ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  zmqpubtxinfo = ""
```

  # `zmqpubrawblock` specifies the address for publishing raw block notifications.
  # Example: "tcp://127.0.0.1:28332"
  # Default is "", meaning the topic is disabled

>   zmqpubrawblock: ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  zmqpubrawblock = ""
```

  # `zmqpubrawtx` specifies the address for publishing raw transaction notifications.
  # Example: "tcp://127.0.0.1:28332"
  # Default is "", meaning the topic is disabled

>   zmqpubrawtx: ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  zmqpubrawtx = ""
```

  # `zmqpubhwm` defines the High Watermark (HWM) for ZeroMQ message pipes.
  # This parameter determines the maximum number of messages ZeroMQ can buffer before blocking the publishing of further messages.
  # The watermark is applied uniformly to all active topics.
  # Default is 1000

>   zmqpubhwm: 1000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  zmqpubhwm = 1000
```

### Message Format

Messages in ZeroMQ, following the Pactus message format,
begin with a 2-byte Topic ID, followed by topic-specific data and a 4-byte sequence number,
The sequence number, which acts as an incremental counter for each Topic ID and
is encoded in little-endian format, helps detect lost messages by tracking the message count.

![Pactus zeroMQ Message Format](../assets/pip-36/pactus_zeromq.png)

#### Topic ID

Topic ID is a fixed lenght two bytes and defined as below:

1. **0x0001**: Block Info
2. **0x0002**: Transaction Info
3. **0x0003**: Raw Block
4. **0x0004**: Raw Transaction

### Topic Data

The topic data contains variable-length information specific to each topic, as outlined below:

#### Block Info

The Block Info topic data is structured as:

```text
<Proposer Address: 21 bytes> + <Block Time in Unix: 4 bytes> + <Block Number: 4 bytes>
```

#### Transaction Info

The Transaction Info topic data is structured as:

```text
<Transaction ID: 32 bytes> + <Block Number: 4 Bytes>
```

The block number indicates the block in which the transaction is confirmed.
If the block number is set to `0`, the transaction remains unconfirmed.

> This enables the service to notify applications when transactions enter the transaction pool,
> with potential for future expansion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows the service to notify applications when transactions enter the transaction pool, with room for future expansion.
```

  # Example: "tcp://127.0.0.1:28332"
  # Default is "", meaning the topic is disabled
  zmqpubblockinfo: ""

  # `zmqpubtxinfo` specifies the address for publishing transaction info notifications.
  # Example: "tcp://127.0.0.1:28332"
  # Default is "", meaning the topic is disabled
  zmqpubtxinfo: ""

  # `zmqpubrawblock` specifies the address for publishing raw block notifications.
  # Example: "tcp://127.0.0.1:28332"
  # Default is "", meaning the topic is disabled
  zmqpubrawblock: ""

  # `zmqpubrawtx` specifies the address for publishing raw transaction notifications.
  # Example: "tcp://127.0.0.1:28332"
  # Default is "", meaning the topic is disabled
  zmqpubrawtx: ""

  # `zmqpubhwm` defines the High Watermark (HWM) for ZeroMQ message pipes.
  # This parameter determines the maximum number of messages ZeroMQ can buffer before blocking the publishing of further messages.
  # The watermark is applied uniformly to all active topics.
  # Default is 1000
  zmqpubhwm: 1000
```

The socket type is PUB and the address must be a valid ZeroMQ socket address.
The same address can be used in more than one notification.

> The same notification can be specified more than once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same notification can be specified multiple times if needed.
```

The High Watermark (HWM) defines the capacity of ZeroMQ's internal message pipes.
For simplicity, the watermark number is applied to all active topics.

> If an address in the configuration file is left empty, the corresponding topic will be disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Leaving an address empty in the configuration file will disable the corresponding topic.
```
